The Fire Weather Index (FWI) estimates wildfire danger using weather conditions that influence the spread of wildfires. The FWI is comprised of multiple components that are developed using daily readings of temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, and 24-hour precipitation. This weather information is used to estimate the total fuel available for combustion (dry organic material) and the rate of fire spread. The FWI is useful for evaluating weather-based conditions that heighten the danger of wildfire spread once ignition has occurred; it does not account for sources of ignition, which can have both natural and human causes.

The FWI ranges from zero to infinity, with higher numbers corresponding to greater fire danger. The level of wildfire danger, as represented by FWI, varies based on regional characteristics, such as a region’s typical level of fire danger and its land cover. For example, areas in the U.S. Southwest, which are often exceptionally dry, will have higher average daily FWI values than areas in the Northeast. A relatively high FWI that suggests a heightened level of fire danger in the Northeast might correspond to average fire danger in the Southwest. Despite this variation, FWI values in excess of 20 typically represent high levels of fire danger, with levels above 30 representing very high to potentially extreme levels of fire danger. A representative example of fire danger classes used by the European Forest Fire Information System can be found [here](https://forest-fire.emergency.copernicus.eu/about-effis/technical-background/fire-danger-forecast).

The FWI is comprised of six components that are developed using daily readings of temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, and 24-hour precipitation. These readings are taken at solar noon and reflect fire danger at early- to mid-afternoon, typically the time of day in which fire weather conditions are more conducive to fire spread.

Three of the FWI’s components estimate the amount of moisture on and beneath the forest floor. These include measures of the moisture content of:

Fine fuels or forest litter (e.g., dried leaves) on top of the forest floor;
Intermediate organic layers, such as decomposing plant matter;
Deep organic layers and soils, which correspond to drought measures.
These moisture content components feed into the two primary subindices that generate the FWI. The first of these is the Initial Spread Index, which measures the expected rate of fire spread; it is based on wind speeds and the moisture content of fine fuels (#1 above). The second is the Buildup Index, which represents the total amount of forest fuel available for consumption, as measured via moisture in intermediate and deep organic layers (#2 and #3 above). The Initial Spread Index and the Buildup Index combine to generate the Fire Weather Index, or the index depicted in ClimRR.

The FWI, also known as the Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index, was developed by the Canadian Forest Service. For more information on the index and its methodology, please visit the [National Wildfire Coordinating Group](https://www.nwcg.gov/publications/pms437/cffdrs/fire-weather-index-system) or the Canadian Forestry Service’s [report detailing FWI’s development and structure](https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pubwarehouse/pdfs/19927.pdf).